published-at: 2015-08-24T08:50:14.000Z
tags: 100words100days,print-line-debugging,debugging,tdd,clojure
title: Clojure print-line debugging
---
<p>The Clojure REPL provides the Clojure developer with a great deal of power. It loads in your source code into memory and then allows you to run any function with any parameters, viewing the result on-screen. This turns out to be incredibly useful for debugging.</p><p>But there’s another form of debugging that isn’t so useful, and that’s print-line debugging.</p><p>Print-line debugging is essentially manual testing, which I’ve written about before. The technique boils down to inserting print-line statements at suspected points of error in order to glimpse the content of your data structures. Then you run your program and look at the output generated. If nothing useful appeared then you go back and insert some more print-line statements at other suspected points of error. There’s a lot of trial-and-error involved in this process. Trial-and-error is also known as guesswork, and it’s something professionals must try to avoid.</p><p>For the test-driven developer, this form of debugging is tempting and I have my moments when I do lots of it. It’s tempting because, on the surface, it’s quick and easy. You have a failing test and can’t quite see where the failure lies, so you can insert a few print-lines to show up. Assuming that you find the right suspected points of error and insertion points for your print-lines, you can quickly pin-point the error and fix the code, making your test green.</p><p>The problem with this is that the original assumption is complete and utter hogwash.</p><p>Stay tuned for part 2 tomorrow!</p>