published-at: 2015-08-17T18:32:33.000Z
tags: 100words100days,google,programming
title: Google, part 4
---
<p>Google kick-started the software-as-a-service movement: it’s software is in the cloud. Microsoft and IBM’s business software exists “on premise”, meaning that it must be installed on the customer’s hardware for it to function. For companies of large-enough size to warrant site licenses for software such as Microsoft Exchange and Microsoft Office, they must think not just of the purchase price but also the data storage costs and backup processes, and the IT staff required to install and maintain these products. For startups and SMEs, this is not an option: Microsoft Exchange in particular is, quite simply, out of their league. Previously, these businesses resorted to personal email services such as Hotmail in order to do business.</p><p>Google blew all this out of the water and forever changed the game of business software. Google Mail and Google Docs run in Google’s data centers, with no associated installation or staffing costs. Startups utilize these services in a way that before they could only dream of.</p><p>But at what cost? Your data now “belongs” to Google, held securely locked away within the Google empire. Google scans your email in order to display targeted advertising. The NSA (and goodness knows who else) access your data stored within these data centers at whim. And most sinister of all is that fact that you’re now locked-in: if Google decide to make a change to their data policies, you’re more likely to accept those changes because the “deactivation energy”--that of taking your data out of Google--is so high.</p><p>Data is the new dollar: the more data a corporation has about you, the more powerful it is. Google’s services might look like a good deal, but in return for the cheap monetary cost you are paying a high cost in freedom and, as I explained in my previous post, creative expression. You are selling your soul to the devil.<br></p>