published-at: 2015-09-26T20:50:21.000Z
tags: 100words100days,empathy
title: Opinions
---
<p>People do not deal in facts. They deal in opinion. (And that’s a fact!)</p><p>Each of our individual realities is filtered through the lens of our perception. When we offer up any statement, its truth value is based not simply on the words we say, but on our past experiences, our life influences and our belief system. That’s why it’s almost impossible to call anything humans state as ‘fact’. That applies to your friends, your colleagues, your business partner, your landlord. Organizations too: your local pub, your car manufacturer, your regular soft drink brand, your national government, and so on.</p><p>As professionals, we want to make the right decisions in our work. So it’s completely understandable that we want to dig out the facts and avoid opinions.</p><p>And yet, it’s my belief that facts are a fool’s game, and it’s opinions that should be cherished.</p><p>Here’s the problem with fact-finding. By looking for facts, that means you are placing absolute faith in certain pieces of information. You are assuming that some things you hear or read are 100% true. This leaves you open to manipulation, because not everyone has your best interests at heart and will use your absolute faith to misguide you.</p><p>But how can we navigate life relying purely on opinions and not facts? Well, that’s actually simpler than you might think. All we have to do is get to know those people whose opinions we make use of. You have to know their past experiences, their life influences and their belief systems. In addition, you need to know how trustworthy they are—how likely they are to tell you misinformation. They might want do that because of an ulterior motive. Of course, you could class knowing their trustworthiness as simple getting to know their belief systems, since even an ulterior motive is a motive.</p><p>In order to make use of opinions, you do not need to have shared goals. You do not need to share past experiences, or share belief systems. Knowing someone does not mean having to align yourself to people. You just need to appreciate and attempt understanding of others. You might recognize this skill as empathy, and this is one reason why empathy is important in business. By empathizing you’ll gain a greater insight of the facts behind the opinion.</p>