published-at: 2015-09-20T02:02:59.000Z
tags: 100words100days,rbai,belfast
title: Segregation
---
<p>I was schooled at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution (RBAI), a boy’s grammar school founded in 1810, prominently located in the centre of the divided city of Belfast. Its street address is College Square East, and it’s not easy to miss should you ever take a stroll through Belfast city centre.</p><p>Belfast is a city of Protestants and Catholics, and RBAI is, and always has been, a school for Protestant boys. I did not meet a single catholic until I left Northern Ireland. That is a topic for another post, but putting my own personal experience aside, the 21st century has seen a growing national awareness of the need for integrated education, meaning mixed Protestant and Catholic schools. For many years, certainly as long as I can remember, it has been well understood that integration at all levels of schooling is crucial to solving the division that exists within the city.</p><p>There are many nations that have serious and worsening race problems. The US immediately comes to mind. So too does France. England is, in general, an inclusive place but is becoming worse. From my experience in Northern Ireland it astounds me that these places have no desire for integrated education systems. England’s current government seems intent to open “free schools” which are exactly the opposite of their name. Most “free” schools are controlled by organisations with very specific motives, such as church groups, the upshot being that schools have an ingrained culture of segregation from the very start.</p><p>I cannot fathom why England is following this path despite having full knowledge of the mess it created in Northern Ireland.</p>